# PDBDOC3A
Back in the days of the Palm Pilot, a company called Aportis produced a compressed file format that allowed you to store large text files, such as books, on these memory-restricted devices. They used a form of compression known as Run Length Encoding (RLE) which is slow to compress (so you'll do that on your Desktop), but fast to uncompress, so it's suitable for the low-power device. The "Aportis Doc" format was sometimes also called TealDoc - Aportis went out of business, and the lore of how to decompress wasn't exactly lost, but became harder to find.
This was mainly the late 1990s and early 2000s - the Psion Series 3 was on the way out, and the Series 5 was in the ascendant, so I wrote some apps to allow you to read Palm Pilot (PDB & PRC) files on the 5mx. Somewhere I must have found the Aportis Doc decompression format, and implemented it in the Psion OPL programming language. One app was called PdbRead, which was mainly for Palm databases, but could also handle some bits of AportisDoc files. The other was (HebRead)[https://web.archive.org/web/20030207095620/http://palmaris.com/hebread.htm], which was really intended to allow you to read Hebrew AportisDoc books on the Psion. (I don't speak much Hebrew - I just thought this would be an interesting project!). HebRead handles AportisDoc files reasonably well in Latin character languages too.
However the poor wee Series 3a/c/mx range (as far as I know) never had an AportisDoc reader, which is sad, because their memory constraints make a compressed text reader even more pressing. And here we are in 2025!
Long story short, I'm working on **PdbDoc3a** - an app to allow you to open these old files (which are still kicking around the internet - lots of Project Gutenberg books have about 40% compression). My hope is that it will encourage more people to get their Series 3 machines out and used in daily life.
I hope to provide more detail on this project on this page as it moves on - early days yet! (October 2025).
# Aportis Doc format (AportisDoc)
The files are essentially databases in Palm's proprietary format. Here's how it breaks down:
* 
